[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> 81 years ago, a business
took off in a small town
in Queensland.
It was a business--
>> If giving birth to Olivia
was the most empowering moment
of my life, giving birth to
Matilda was the most joyous
moment of my life.
I'm a filmmaker and a director
and an actor and a storyteller.
I'm a storyteller.
Family to me means
expanding the love.
So there's two of you.
You love each other,
and you have a baby,
and there's more love.
And then you go, oh god,
I've got another one.
This is so hard.
You have another one,
and there's more love.
And then you go,
oh, no this is--
I'm just too tired.
I need to sleep, or
I can't afford it.
And then you have another
one, and there's more love.
There's also more
mess, but yeah, that's
what it means to me.
For a long time I've been really
into-- some people would say
obsessed--
with Art Deco and with
the Interwar period.
And the thing of
balance and peace
has been something that
I've worked a long time
to try and get to, and I'm
pretty content at the moment,
despite being 30 weeks pregnant.
I'm comfortable and content.
So when I got pregnant, I
didn't know a lot about birth
and having a baby.
The things I did
know were not great.
When my aunt gave
birth to my cousin,
I was, like, 14 years old or so.
I remember it quite well.
I remember going to
visit her in hospital,
and I asked her how she was.
And she turned around
to me and said,
if you want to know
how I feel, go and sit
on a barbed wire fence.
And I went, [GASP].
And about two years
later, my best friend
had an older sister who'd
had her first baby, 19
or 20 or something, and
again, we were sort of 15.
And she had said
to me that birth
was like trying to
shit a vacuum cleaner.
Then I think when you do get
pregnant, most women-- maybe
that's a generalization.
But I think most women want
a whole lot of knowledge
because it's unknown when
you haven't done it before,
and you want to
know what it's like.
You want to know
what it feels like.
And you start to read stuff.
So I started to
read lots of books.
And you know I went and
bought "Up the Duff"
because it's funny
and has cute pictures,
and I went and bought "What
To Expect" because you do.
But then I started
to read "Secret Life
Of the Unborn Child"
and "Active Birth"
and a book on lotus
birth and a book
called "Gentle Birth
Myth," and I started--
and I read all of them
in the first three
months or something.
And I started to go, oh, wow.
No, there's a whole other side.
I don't think I actually
want the drug thing because I
want the best thing
for my baby, and I
want to work with my body.
And so I rang up the
female obstetricians
that were on this
list, and there
was one that had an opening.
Matt and I went to see her.
I didn't ask the right
questions then, I must say,
and I didn't speak
to anybody else.
I felt a bit in a
hurry to make sure I
was booked into a hospital.
Then I would keep on
seeing this obstetrician
for my appointments.
They'd go for about
5, 10 minutes.
She'd take my blood
pressure, examine me.
And I asked her when we were
going to talk about the birth
because I had this
thing about-- because
of the barbed wire fence
comment, the coming out,
the baby coming out.
I going, but what happens
when the baby comes out?
Because this is what
I'm concerned about.
And she said, I don't
want to talk about this.
It's too early to
talk about this.
We'll talk about it when
you're in your third trimester
later on.
And the reason she gave, she
said, because women get too
hung up on the birth and not
that they're getting a baby.
And something in
that rang true to me.
But because I wasn't getting
the answers from her,
and I needed more
information, I went
and I did a course with a
woman called Lina Clerke,
and she's a birth educator
and a doula and a midwife.
But her business
is to do classes.
And there were people
having home births.
I'd never heard of a home birth.
There were people
in birth centers.
who were having
an obstetrician at home birth.
There were people who
just had midwife-led care.
And there were
people in hospitals,
both public and private,
all doing these classes.
And I learned then,
at that class,
that there were lots
of ways to have a baby,
and that you could do
whatever you wanted.
Then she went around the room
and she said, does anybody
have any fears or concerns or
things I want to talk about?
And I was the first
one she asked.
And I said, oh, I'm
worried about the tearing
because this is
part of my stuff.
I'm worried about the
tearing or the cutting
at the second stage
when the baby comes out.
And she said, why does
that have to happen?
So she really helped
me get over that fear,
and that was the one
sort of fear I had.
Anyway, at 36 weeks
pregnant, I finally
have my birth plan meeting
with my obstetrician.
And my husband's not
there for that visit.
I'm on my own.
And I'm excited.
I'm excited about giving birth.
I'm excited about
finally talking
about what I want with the woman
who's going to deliver my baby.
And I said, so in early labor,
we'd like to labor at home.
Then we'll come in at the
right time when we come in,
and I said I didn't
want any pain relief.
And she laughed at me.
And she laughed at me in this
really condescending kind
of, yeah right, kind of way.
And so I started to get alarm
bells going off a little bit.
And then I'd learned all these
great things about positions,
and it made so much
sense to me, someone
who's trained as a dancer and
knows their body very well
and what their body can do,
about squatting and opening up
your pelvis to let then
gravity helping the baby.
And she said, oh, all my ladies
give birth on their back.
And I'm thinking,
you don't want to get
your Armani trousers dirty by
squatting on the floor with me.
Like, that's what I was
thinking of her at that point.
And then I had done a lot
of reading about third stage
and about the blood transfer
that happens from the placenta
to the baby and
also the hormones,
like taking away the
baby's adrenaline
and giving it the
oxytocin and it
getting the same happy
hormones as the mother.
And to me and to Matthew,
that seemed really important.
So I did not want
to cut the cord,
and I wanted a natural
third stage delivery.
And she just said to me--
I get so angry
thinking about it.
She said to me, oh, no, we
have to get that placenta out
straight away.
I always cut the cord and
then take the placenta out
because my job's not done till
I can inspect the placenta.
Her job's not done till she
can inspect the placenta.
So she can't wait around
40 minutes for me?
So that made me very upset.
So I just said, I don't
think this is going to work.
I think I have to go.
And the one thing I'll
give her credit for
is she recognized it wasn't
going to work as well,
and she didn't try
to talk me around.
She just went, yeah, no, I
don't think is going to work.
Mind you, she didn't
recommend anybody else.
So I walked out of there
at 36 weeks pregnant.
I had no way to have my baby.
But when I walked out, I
didn't continue to feel angry.
To be honest, I probably
bit panicked about the fact
that I had nowhere to
give birth, suddenly.
But then I was like,
right, we have to fix this.
And through this course,
this workshop I'd done,
luckily, there was
people I could call,
and I knew the right
questions to ask.
And within a really
short space of time--
in fact, that same day, there's
this wonderful place called
the Hawthorne Birth Center.
It's a standalone birth center.
It was a water birth center.
They specialized
in water births.
It was like coming home.
I suddenly then had no
fear about anything,
felt totally relaxed.
And when I then, in a little
bit of a defensive manner,
started to go through
my birth plan.
I was met with, oh, yeah, yeah.
And yeah, yeah,
yeah, we do this.
Oh, you can do
whatever you want.
And yeah, get in the water,
you can get out the water.
And oh, no, no, we don't cut the
cord until after third stage.
And so, just so different.
I still asked Bruce, how
far is it to the hospital?
He wouldn't tell me in time.
It was quite hilarious.
He'd say, oh, it's about sort of
five or six contractions away.
But because he was
so relaxed about it,
I wasn't worried about it.
>> The military is overextended.
>> And how are you feeling?
>> Same.
Having contractions.
They hurt a little
bit, not too bad.
>> I'd gone to bed, and I
woke up with labor pains.
And my sister had stayed the
night, and Matt was there.
And he rang the midwife and she
said, I'll go to the nurse said
and put pool on.
So then when I got
to the birth center,
I just want to get in
the water straight away.
>> Know when we'll be back now.
>> She's having a baby.
Kate's having a baby.
I'm just waiting until the
contraction's finished.
She's more agreeable then.
>> I'm not saying
it didn't hurt.
And we all know that labor is
painful because, hey, everyone
tells us that all the time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Fuck.
Oh, baby.
Really hurts.
>> It did hurt.
But to be perfectly
honest, I had a gastro bug
that I picked up in Thailand
on my honeymoon that
was 10 times worse.
And when this involuntary
muscle contraction happened,
something went off in my
head, and I went, aha.
OK.
I get it.
Then I went into second
stage and through transition,
and then I got the pushing urge.
And when I got the
pushing urge, I
was like, oh, all right,
that bearing down.
And so the only way I
can describe it-- this
isn't a medical
description, you understand.
This is a Kate
Gorman description--
is your uterus is doing this
and pushing down and pushing in,
and you can use
your stomach muscles
to do that as well
in the same time.
And once I got that, it was
like I had something to--
I knew what to do.
And I was like, oh, I'm fine.
We were monitoring
the baby's heartbeat
only with the Sonicaid, though,
not with any fetal monitor.
I ended up having a
three-hour second stage.
I was OK with that.
I wasn't fatigued.
I just went somewhere
else in my body.
I mean, I knew I
was in the room.
I knew Matt was there
in the pool with me,
and my sister was there
and my midwife was there.
But I just--
I just had a job to do
and I was just into it.
And I had no idea
it was three hours.
I thought it was half an hour.
But what that meant
was I was doing
this slow opening,
two steps forward,
one step back, two steps
forward, one step back,
and I had no tearing in
the end when she came.
So then at the last minute
I remember feeling the head
and that she was
coming out and just,
oh my god, my baby's coming.
Oh, I'm so excited.
It was just-- it was beautiful.
And I was doing it.
And then Bruce, the
obstetrician, he stuck his head
in, said, everything all right?
And Barbara went, yeah, fine.
It's going to be soon.
And he went, doing
a great job, Kate.
And he walked out of the room.
Hilarious, but how wonderful.
Isn't that what perhaps
an obstetrician should do?
I don't know.
Then when Olivia was born in
the water, Matt caught her.
He was sitting behind me.
And he passed her up
sort of through my legs,
and I brought her up
through the water.
And when you have a
water birth, the water
is body temperature,
and so was the room.
It all has to be very
warm, especially the water,
so the baby doesn't try and
take a breathe under water.
And you bring the baby
up, and she was still
breathing through the cord.
And Barbara gave me a face
washer cloth, flannel .
And she said, Kate, just
wipe her face and blow on it.
And so I wiped her face and
I went, and she went, ah.
And it was like
giving life again,
like it just giving birth.
And then I made her breathe.
So I don't know why
I'm crying so much.
It was actually a
really wonderful thing.
There's nothing like it.
It's a miracle.
It's extraordinary.
So for my second
pregnancy, circumstances
had us living in England.
So we were living
in the country.
I actually was already
pregnant when I went there.
Because what I wanted
was a home birth,
because after you've had that
experience, you can't go back.
You know too much.
I can't get back.
And I knew what I wanted
was a water birth at home.
[INAUDIBLE]
>> Kate, just try and keep
breathing when you hear
the next contraction.
Just keep--
>> But she's kicking me.
>> [INAUDIBLE] next contraction
we'll deliver, I'm sure.
>> We'll just bring her up
by the cat's legs, yeah?
>> Don't push, Matt.
You're pushing.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> Ow!
Ow.
She's kicking me.
>> It's not you, Matt, it's her.
>> Oh, my darling,
the head's out.
The head's out.
>> I know, darling.
>> She's got-- feels like
she's got so much hair.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> Well, where's the
next contraction?
>> Well, indeed.
>> She's just-- you've
just done the hard work.
>> The head's out.
She's just sitting there.
>> [INAUDIBLE] you, dear.
[INAUDIBLE]
>> Ouch, ouch, ouch.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
[YELLING]
>> Wow!
Oh, oh.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> Oh, my darling.
>> [INAUDIBLE] one
minute to 12:00.
>> Oh, my darling.
Oh, my darling.
You're a beautiful thing.
You're beautiful.
Oh, you're beautiful.
Yes, you are.
It was three pushes and
you're out, my darling.
Is she OK?
Is she breathing?
>> She's fine.
Yeah.
>> Darling.
You're so cool.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
That's the baby's bottom.